- What is SQL?

SQL is a special-purpose programming language designed for managing data held in a relational database management system (RDBMS), or for stream processing in a relational data stream management system (RDSMS).

Originally based upon relational algebra and tuple relational calculus, SQL consists of a data definition language and a data manipulation language. The scope of SQL includes data insert, query, update and delete, schema creation and modification, and data access control. Although SQL is often described as, and to a great extent is, a declarative language (4GL), it also includes procedural elements.

SQL was one of the first commercial languages for Edgar F. Codd's relational model, as described in his influential 1970 paper, "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks." Despite not entirely adhering to the relational model as described by Codd, it became the most widely used database language.

SQL became a standard of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in 1986, and of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in 1987. Since then, the standard has been revised to include a larger set of features. Despite the existence of such standards, though, most SQL code is not completely portable among different database systems without adjustments.

- What is DML?

DML is short name of Data Manipulation Language which deals with data manipulation, and includes most common SQL statements such SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE etc, and it is used to store, modify, retrieve, delete and update data in database.

SELECT – retrieve data from the a database
INSERT – insert data into a table
UPDATE – updates existing data within a table
DELETE – Delete all records from a database table
MERGE – UPSERT operation (insert or update)
CALL – call a PL/SQL or Java sub program
EXPLAIN PLAN – interpretation of the data access path
LOCK TABLE – concurrency Control

- What is DDL?

DDL is short name of Data Definition Language, which deals with database schemas and descriptions, of how the data should reside in the database.

CREATE – to create objects in the database
ALTER – alters the structure of the database
DROP – delete objects from the database
TRUNCATE – remove all records from a table, including all spaces allocated for the records are removed
COMMENT – add comments to the data dictionary
RENAME – rename an object

- The most important SQL commands

1. Inserting records in a table
INSERT INTO students (id, name, age) VALUES ('1', 'alan', 28);

2. Viewing all records from a table.
SELECT * FROM students;

3. Viewing only selected records from a table
SELECT TOP(1) FROM students;

4. Deleting records from a table
DELETE FROM students WHERE name = 'alan';

5. Changing data in existing records in a table
UPDATE students SET age = 22 WHERE name = 'amy';

6. Viewing records from a table without knowing exact details
SELECT * FROM students WHERE name LIKE 'd%n';

7. Using more than one condition in WHERE clause to retrieve records
SELECT * FROM students WHERE name = 'dan' AND age = 24;
SELECT * FROM students WHERE name = 'dan' OR age > 25

8. Viewing only selected columns from a table
SELECT name FROM students WHERE age > 25;